# Methodology
### TODO
* This section could be used when we get to structuralism. Many good examples of the connection between foundation and violence.

H.D. begins The Walls Do Not Fall with the observation of a ruined city. The observation from which the work derives its title and develops its principal insight is that the walls of the houses remain long after they have been abandoned. She moves immediately from houses to bodies: the skulls that remain intact after volancic action. [Note reference to war (rails gone for guns).]

Among many other things, this scenes illustrates a key motivating insight of structuralism. That despite certain transformations we find a kind of skeleton of relations between concepts in Western thought (Note references to "Western thought" are not intended to indicate that the observations here are unique to the west, but merely that I confine the scope of my claims to the west for now, for lack of the expertise that would be required to generalize them), and that it is not so easy to destroy this structure or escape it.

The dream of modernism in the 20th century was to escape this ancient form so that we could begin again and build the world anew. This was the theme that united modernist art, mathematics and the holocaust---that fire that aspired through nightmarish violence to obliterate our historical narrative and genetic legacy. (Note the two conceptions of year zero: one in which Germans won and one in which they did not: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germany,_Year_Zero)

In mathematics, it was the search for new foundations that fueled the project of formalization, of which David Hilbert was perhaps the most prominent figure. This project motivated the development of modern logic. As Bertrand Russell described it: a quest to put arithmetic (and thus the concept of number) on new foundations  (Shelley's poem Alastor). This quest was inextricably tied to the development of computer science. As Hilbert put it, it was the quest to make mathematical proof so precise that it could be performed by a machine. Thus it is no accident that this new logic eventually became implemented in the heart of the microchips we use today.

The program collapsed with Godel's proof, but some maintained hope. What we learn from Derrida, however, is that the problem is not a matter of technical inadequacy. The impulse to develop a new foundation---in fact, a first foundation---is itself part of the structure that the adventurers seek to escape. Although it is a quintessentially modernist gesture, it is a gesture produced by structural forces that themselves brought on the advent of modernism. We cannot escape from this history; we can only obliterate it, wipe it from our collective memory, through violence on an extraordinary scale. Even if we were willing to absorb the cost of this effort, it would not produce the desired effect. We would not really start from a new beginning; we would simply become amnesiacs, ignorant of how we arrived at our new desolate world.

At the same time, the observation that the concept of structure depends on a concept of foundation that is inherently unsatisfiable changes our understanding of structure. We recognize that it is not the unchanging geometric landscape of the a priori. It has a characteristic of motion through time. It derives its authority in a strange way, not from its correspondence or tie to externalities, but from its coherence and, more strangely, size.

In a similar way, the pursuit of a new and more precise logic has changed the characteristics of logic itself. We have now a material logic, embodied in the program, the would have been unthinkable to earlier believers in the logos and eidos. Thus in this surprising way the project of the logicians did succeed in opening the way forward to a new world---not one built on new, perfect foundations, but one in which we must re-imagine the episteme as a moving structure: always expanding at the edges, yet inherently incomplete. 

Yet the walls do not fall. Logic, axiom, foundation all remain. Their meaning has changed, but this is not surprising because the meaning of meaning has changed also---it has become more obviously changeable, no longer a strictly internal property, describing an essence and defined by some authoritative source, but more a manifestation of a history of contextual associations: what I would venture to describe as the "trace" of a word or concept.

In this new, churning landscape, process assumes a heightened role. It may be easiest to undestand this transformation by considering the very practical problem of geometry. This branch of mathematics, long privileged in western thought---valued by philosophers and later Christian doctrine that drew upon Platonic views to shore up its belief system---achieved its modern axiomatic form under David Hilbert, who sought to achieve its long-held goals of establishing the truth of relationships between the objects it defines. Hilbert imagined that all true theorems of geometry could eventually be discovered. He further believed this could be done through a purely mechanical process if the right algorithm were found to determine whether a properly formed statement was true or false.

We now know this is not the case: there are an infinite number of theorems that can be produced from the initial axioms of geometry. Moreover, we do not know whether we might discover one day that these initial axioms conflict. If that were to happen we would need to re-examine the foundations again and adjust them. What this means is that geometry itself has a kind of overarching and unending process of expanding. If it had been as Hilbert imagined, we might have achieved a picture of a permanent, unchanging structure. Instead we have a structure that is always in process. Thus the question of process suddenly becomes as important or more important than the theorems themselves. In this way the method eclipses the theorem.

The study of algorithms, a core interest of computer science, is a study of method. The rise of this particular branch of mathematics is indicative of a change in the meaning and priorities of mathematics. The focus is no longer on an episteme that had previously been imagined as itself a geometric structure, but on an episteme understood as a process.

## This dissertation
The method of this dissertation is to begin with the claim that the concepts of western philosophy persist in influencing contemporary mathematics and computer science. This cannot be done comprehensively. I am limited to providing a close analysis of a few examples that I believe to be of particular importance. These include the ideas of artifice and intelligence that frame the current project of AI, and the set-theoretic landscape that has been presented as a foundation for contemporary mathematics. I show that both of these, in their current state, remain closely tied to the philosophical assumptions at work up to the moment of structuralism. The reason for this argument is to demonstrate that, like structuralism, they have a kind of inherent instability in their foundations. I believe that as the insights of post-structural thought proceed in their slow propagation through the humanities into the sciences, we will see inexorable change. In fact, the signs of these changes are everywhere, but I argue that they are more profound than commonly believed, and the process of making this shift in paradigms is less complete than many would imagine. In other words, the implications of post-structuralism are currently underestimated.

## The structure and character of metaphysical concepts
In more detail, this project looks for particular persistent concepts in mathematics that appear to have a "metaphysical" character. For this to make sense, I need to explain both what I mean by such a characterization and why this character is related to the developments described above.

### Metaphysics and the structure of the episteme
"Geometer's privilege"
I describe here the episteme as it was envisioned before the critique of structuralism. As mentioned, "truth" and especially "a priori truth" was understood using a paradigm closely aligned with geometry. It was also very closely identified with a Platonic view of the world, in which the world of truth was a world of "pure forms", the eidos, and the goal of the philosopher was to ascend to this world and "see it" through the contemplation of its shadows.

What Derrida observes in Structure, Sign and Play is that this concept of truth requires a foundation to secure it: some central collection of axioms that are undeniable. Surely Bertrand Russell shared this view. Likewise, it was central to the project of that famous geometer, Rene Descartes. When one expands to think of the axioms of not just geometry, but to the entirety of secure knowledge, this set of "axioms" becomes the entire collection of first principles that philosophers refer to as a "metaphysics." A metaphysics provides the foundation for all knowledge that can be rationally derived from it.

Aside: it is important to acknowledge a major recent school of thought in philosophy that proceeds more or less under the name of positivism, which believes "metaphysics" can be replaced by a scientific method of acquiring knowledge. I take the view, which I will later have to defend in more detail, that this approach does not move beyond metaphysics, as it dreamed of doing, so much as replace one metaphysics with another. Further, the effort to move beyond metaphysics is yet another example of a project that remains quintessentially modernist---thus this is yet another quest for new foundations.

Metaphysics always introduces a problem of its own foundations. It has a characteristic method of resolving this problem, also described by Derrida in structure sign and play: it posits a set of primal assumptions that serve as its foundation. This set of assumptions can be conceived metaphorically as the center or origin of the structure. In order for it to operate as a true foundation, the question of its own origin, or interior structure must be prohibited, or at least deffered.

### Put here the logic of the center and the supplement


### Why metaphysics is related to above developments

The desire for foundation is a desire for a complete metaphysics. Thus what structuralism apprehends as the structure of a center---or what I would argue is better characterized as a metaphysical _gesture_---is the production of a foundational concept that both guarantees the conclusions of the system and remains beyond scrutiny.

### Strategies of the center
The center is an authorizing strategy. There are several ways of producing it:
* Erase or render illegible the method of its production.
* Mutual deferment beyond the boundaries of discourse (i.e. relegate it to a problem of philosophy)

